.TH MCANDUMP 1 "April 2026" "mcandump 2.6.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
mcandump \- SocketCAN dumper and optional CANcorder logger proxy
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mcandump
.RI [ OPTIONS ] " <interface>"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mcandump
reads CAN and CAN-FD frames from a Linux SocketCAN interface and prints them in
a candump-like terminal view. With
.BR --serve ,
it also forwards the same traffic to CANcorder clients via the ECUconnect
Logger protocol over TCP and announces the service via Zeroconf/mDNS.
.PP
By default it runs in line-oriented output mode with no network side effects.
With
.BR --interactive ,
mcandump switches the terminal into an alternate-screen interactive viewer with
scrollback, cursor navigation, and search.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I <interface>
SocketCAN interface name, for example
.BR can0 ,
.BR vcan0 ,
or
.BR slcan0 .
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-timestamp " <absolute|delta|none>"
Timestamp display mode. The default is
.BR absolute .
.TP
.BR \-\-no-color
Disable colored output.
.TP
.BR \-\-theme " <auto|light|dark>"
Select the color palette.
.BR auto
(default) queries the terminal background color via OSC 11, falling back
to the
.B COLORFGBG
environment variable; it then picks the light palette for paper-colored
backgrounds and the dark palette otherwise.
.BR light
and
.BR dark
force the corresponding palette explicitly — useful over SSH or inside
multiplexers that swallow the OSC query, or when auto-detection picks
the wrong one.
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quiet
Suppress terminal frame display and only forward traffic over TCP.
.TP
.BR \-\-interactive
Enable the interactive terminal UI. This conflicts with
.BR --quiet .
The interactive frame buffer has no internal size limit and grows until process
memory is exhausted.
.TP
.BI \-f ", " \-\-log-file " <path>"
Write a candump-compatible compact text logfile to
.IR path .
Log writing happens on a dedicated background thread so slow disk I/O does not
block CAN capture.
.PP
If
.B --log-file
is given without
.IR path ,
mcandump creates a logfile in the current directory using a candump-style name
such as
.BR candump-2026-04-02_154530.log .
.TP
.BR \-\-serve
Enable the CANcorder logger: bind a TCP server on an auto-picked port and
announce it via Zeroconf so CANcorder clients can discover the logger. Off by
default — without this flag
.B mcandump
behaves like
.BR candump (1)
and does not touch the network.
.TP
.BI \-\-service-name " <name>"
Override the advertised Zeroconf service name. Implies
.BR --serve .
.TP
.BI \-\-yank-to " " { clipboard | primary | both }
Which X11/Wayland selection(s) interactive yanks should populate. Defaults to
.B clipboard
(Ctrl-V paste), matching the freedesktop.org clipboards spec which reserves
.B primary
for live mouse selections. Use
.B primary
or
.B both
to make yanks pasteable with the middle mouse button. No-op on macOS/Windows
and in terminals whose OSC 52 implementation ignores the
.B p
selection field.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show command-line help.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Show version information.
.SH INTERACTIVE MODE
Interactive mode uses an alternate terminal screen and keeps all received
frames in memory so older traffic can be inspected without stopping capture.
The interface name is shown once in the status bar at the bottom
.RB ( "pos: N/M  <iface>: <mode>" ),
not on every row, so the payload and ASCII columns get the full line width.
.PP
Available shortcuts:
.TP
.B Up / Down
Move one frame up or down.
.TP
.B Shift+Up / Shift+Down
Resize the live tail pane that appears when scrolled away from the
latest frames. The tail pane shows the most recent traffic so you
never lose sight of current bus activity while investigating older
frames.
.TP
.B PgUp / PgDn
Move one page up or down.
.TP
.B Home / End
Jump to the oldest or newest frame.
.TP
.B /
Search for a payload byte sequence in hexadecimal, for example
.BR "DE AD BE EF" " or " deadbeef .
.TP
.B i
Search for an arbitration ID in hexadecimal, for example
.BR 123 " or " 0x18FF50E5 .
.TP
.B n / N
Jump to the next or previous search result.
.TP
.B v
Start or stop a vim-style visual selection. While visual mode is active every
navigation key (arrows,
.BR PgUp / PgDn ,
.BR Home / End ,
.BR n / N )
extends the highlighted range.
.TP
.B y
Yank: copy the current visual selection (or just the cursor frame, if no
selection is active) to the system clipboard as candump log lines
.RI ( (sec.us)\  iface\  ID#DATA ).
The transfer uses the terminal's OSC 52 escape sequence, so no external helper
.RB ( xclip ", " wl-copy ", " pbcopy )
is required and the copy works over SSH. On Linux yanks populate the
.B CLIPBOARD
selection (pasted with Ctrl-V) by default, matching the freedesktop.org
clipboards spec which reserves
.B PRIMARY
for live mouse selections. Use
.BR --yank-to " " primary
or
.BR --yank-to " " both
to also populate the
.B PRIMARY
selection, making yanks pasteable with the middle mouse button. Inside
.BR tmux ,
enable passthrough with
.BR "set -g set-clipboard on" .
.TP
.B Y
Yank as compact hex-only
.RB ( ID#DATA ,
no timestamp or interface).
.TP
.B V
Yank every frame matching the currently active search — useful after narrowing
down with
.BR /
or
.BR i .
.TP
.B a
Yank the entire capture buffer as candump log lines, regardless of cursor,
selection, or active search.
.TP
.B A
Yank the entire capture buffer as compact hex-only
.RB ( ID#DATA ).
.TP
.B c
Clear the in-memory frame buffer, reset the cursor to the top, and resume
following the tail. Useful for starting a fresh observation window without
leaving the interactive session.
.TP
.B Esc
Cancel the active search prompt or the active visual selection.
.TP
.B q
Exit mcandump.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B mcandump can0
Read from
.B can0
using the default absolute timestamps.
.TP
.B mcandump vcan0 -t delta
Display inter-frame delta timestamps.
.TP
.B mcandump can0 --interactive
Start the interactive viewer with scrollback, search, and clipboard yank.
.TP
.B mcandump can0 --log-file capture.log
Write a candump-compatible logfile while capturing traffic.
.TP
.B mcandump can0 --log-file
Write a candump-compatible logfile using an auto-generated candump-style
filename in the current directory.
.TP
.B mcandump can0 --serve
Dump to the terminal and also forward traffic to CANcorder clients over TCP.
.TP
.B mcandump can0 --serve -q
Forward traffic to TCP clients without writing frames to the terminal.
.SH REQUIREMENTS
mcandump requires Linux with SocketCAN support. Opening the CAN raw socket
typically requires root privileges or the
.B CAP_NET_RAW
capability.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR candump (1),
.BR ip (8)
.SH AUTHOR
Dr. Michael "Mickey" Lauer
.SH LICENSE
MIT
